Lessons & Design Principles of Digital ID as a DPI

Assessment on reusability of existing systems: The decision to build a new identity system with fresh enrolment should be taken post extensive assessment of current IDs in the country. If no other ID covers the full population (civil registry with birth certification, passports, tax, and voter IDs etc) it can be powerful to start a fresh one. 
In countries where IDs with significant coverage exist, an existing ID system could be upgraded into a digital ID by adding verification modes, or reused to populate a new digital ID instead of targeting re-enrollment with fresh data capture into new infrastructure. New IDs can be populated by allowing people to put in their old ID # to fetch data as per that database, or just upload a pic of that ID.
A Minimalist Credential: To ensure accuracy at scale across the population, an ID only really needs 4 mandatory data fields (Name, Date of Birth, Address and Gender) along with two optional fields used for authentication (email and mobile number) plus whichever biometrics the country decides (photograph is enough; can add others (see #5). Citizenship is often added by countries but can be dropped as a mandatory data field - proving citizenship can be hard and exclusionary! Every additional data field excludes some segment of the population that cannot prove that data via documentation. Additional fields also increase the cost and time of enrollment. Maintaining high assurance on the accuracy and currency of the data is also easier with fewer attributes.
A Truly Digital Identity: Rather than relying on expensive smartcards, for new ID systems CDPI suggests a randomly assigned, lifetime 8-15 digit number/ 5-8 digit alphanumeric code with no intelligence built in based on the arrangement of digits. While it may be tempting to assign numbers based on address or other demographics, these are variable and would require updates. It also makes the number/code privacy preserving, revealing no underlying information about the person upon disclosure. 
The ID should be digitally verifiable; i.e it includes the digital signature of the government, incorporates machine readable data and a cryptographically secured QR code to allow for ‘scan and verify’ capabilities for any individual or entity to verify the legitimacy of a given ID.
The ID does not need to include any embedded chips or require any expensive smart card readers for verification. While smartcards with chips are theoretically ‘inclusive’ (don’t require connectivity to verify), they require verifiers to buy expensive smartcard readers and limit the type of entity that can do the authentication. Smartcards also trigger expensive procurement cycles with vendor kickbacks which we prefer to avoid if possible. Individuals should also be allowed to choose their preferred mode of ID storage [See section 3 “Multi-modal access”]
The ID should be able to support consent-driven e-authentication and e-KYC capabilities through Open APIs for Right to Work verification by both the private and public sector. [See section 4 “Capabilities of the digital ID”]
IDs should be further secured as Zero Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs) that will allow individuals to attest to profile fields without revealing specific information.
Countries can also add a provision to generate more identifiers such as virtual identifiers (random tokens generated using an ID) that could be short lived. Newer open source systems such as MOSIP also support alphanumeric handles that could possibly be chosen by the user.
Uniqueness & Biometrics: Many ID systems collect biometrics to enable determination of uniqueness. A photograph, an iris scan and up to 10 fingerprints can be collected to deduplicate the database. 
If so, an ‘exception’ process should be made for individuals with incomplete hands, damaged eyes, or eroded fingerprints (sometimes due to manual labour), leprosy patients, etc. 
Uniqueness is an optional and expensive feature for an identity system. The decision to include biometrics should be based on 1) lower prevalence of mobile phones and emails, which makes biometric authentication the only form that scales to the poorest; and 2) the usage of biometric authentication to remove double dipping across government benefit and subsidy schemes. 
Biometrics can play a crucial role in identity recovery and in binding of digital credentials to people. Evolving presence assurance requirements in digital transactions are relying more and more on biometric authentication with liveness checks. 
However, in contexts where usage of the identity does not require uniqueness, collection of biometric data can be deprioritised!
For large countries or price sensitive countries, 2-3 vendors can be onboarded to do a share of de-deduplication. Any new ID enrolled can be shared with the 2/3biometric de-duplication services. If all confirm uniqueness, the person can be enrolled into the system. If one gave a false positive or false negative, the data would be sent for re-checking and the biometric service company that made an error while checking for uniqueness, can get a reduced share of further biometric samples. This ensures that all biometric providers had continued incentives to ensure their systems were working robustly to prevent being edged out by competition! The data formats in and out to biometric service providers should also be standard to ensure vendor portability.

Drive Value for Citizens: Digital IDs should ensure capabilities on top to enable ease of doing business, easier access to financial or health services, and other time or cost savings to individuals. A strong Digital ID offers 5 capabilities: Scan and verify; e-Authentication; e-KYC, Single sign on; and e-Sign. All these capabilities should be data-blind, i.e. there should be no central record of where the ID has been used and for what purpose.  

Scan and Verify: All entities and individuals can verify the legitimacy of a digital ID by simply scanning the embedded QR code and matching the information displayed in QR code with the information presented in the card (whether physically or through a soft copy). This can also be achieved through digitally shared credentials and identity claims.

e-Authentication capabilities allow individuals to share their digital ID number and for the verification entity to check whether the said individual is Who they say they are (receiving a Yes / No response from the ID server, without any further information exchanged to preserve privacy). 
Offline authentication capabilities based on biometric authentication allow for less digitally savvy individuals to access the same government benefits and work opportunities through physical touchpoints such as kiosks and assisted services. 
Selective disclosure and Zero Knowledge Proofs (ZKPs) allow individuals to share data sufficiency information as “claims”. Claims such as whether they are over the age of 60 to access government pension without revealing their actual age. On selection of sufficient information of their Digital ID, a unique QR code is  generated that can attest to those date fields without revealing underlying information. 

e-KYC capabilities should be be opened up to certain sensitive government departments and regulated financial institutions such as banks to be able to use the Digital ID as a source of truth and information about individuals upon their consent in order to provide them with access to services such as opening bank accounts at lower cost while complying with AML / FATF regulations. Note: Individuals should also able to ‘lock’ their ID in case they choose to suspend e-auth or e-KYC services.

SSO: The Digital ID can further be used as a Single Sign On (SSO) to login or register to any government website or service, preventing the need to build multiple individual profiles (though individuals will retain the right to do so if they choose)

e-Sign: To allow for end to end digital flows for various services, individuals are also allowed to electronically sign contracts (e.g. loan agreements, rent agreements, etc) using their Digital ID in addition to a mobile-number based one-time-password to replace physical “wet” signatures for certain use cases.

Multi-modal access for Inclusion: The ID should enable a robust digital backend and support multi-modal front end access points to support diverse users.
The ID should be stored digitally through e-wallet apps or presented physically. 
To support senior citizens as well as individuals who may lack smartphone access, the ID should also available as PDFs, images and physical copies, with the secure QR code acting as the unified source of trust, along with offline XML download 
The ID number should also be entered into a service provider’s website or form for authentication.

Value Based, Voluntary Enrollment
Enrollment should be voluntary and not made mandatory for individuals.
Individuals should be able to enrol into the Digital ID both on the basis of existing verification documents, as well as without any prior documents via an ‘introducer’ method (e.g. one family member with ID can introduce others; a nonprofit can introduce people they serve; etc) 
Individuals should be incentivised to enrol into the ID system. One mechanism is to link ease of access to government benefits to ID-linked bank accounts. This can ensure the value of benefits reaches individuals in a timely manner. For other individuals, the incentives can be ease of access to formal credit via ease of bank eKYC, access to a fast track SIM card or voter card registration, etc.
At least one of the digital IDs in the country should be valid for life from birth to death
Linking of the digital ID to any scheme or program should be one way and data-blind, i.e. there should be no central record of where the ID has been used and for what purpose. Each individual ministry can add the national ID as a data field, but they should not report back on full usage by the citizen of the digital ID in their sector.

Foundational ID systems are important. It’s very useful to have at least one ID system in the country that covers nearly the whole country, and offers auth/eKYC/a VC. When the political window is right, it’s powerful to be able to push that through in a country because it unlocks multiplier effects - it’s one of those GDP imcreasing DPI because of the myriad use cases that all need to verify you are who you say you are, across every sector and service! At the same time, they require political will to set up because of budget (usually $2-4 per person but can go up higher), and the right kind of institution that can host it in a development and growth-friendly manner (rather than a mandatory/security oriented/’keep out immigrants’ focus). When we see the foundational ID is stuck (some procurement cycles, unproactive Ministry hosting, etc) then it’s useful to nudge verifiability/VCs on other IDs in the country. If you can nudge a new institution that offers ‘eID’ on top of the existing ID provider (Bangladesh has done this) it’s a useful unlock. Even for a good VC approach to fetch data to scale, we need some form of authentication to log in and fetch credentials across departments - a national ID is a useful number to add to other VCs to fetch those certificates, and sometimes gives a good auth for login. 

Ecosystem-based enrollment: orchestrating registration by existing government departments, banks, and other institutions.
One suggestion for large countries is an ecosystem model of enrollment where technical standards were established for all devices (hardware and software). An ecosystem of private technical service providers can be incentivised to procure their own devices as per the set standard and enrol individuals into the network, hiring their own enrollment agents. 
For each unique enrolment, the onboarding service providers were provided with a financial incentive. This ensured that rollout of the ID followed an opex model instead of a heavy capex model. 

Technology: Open Standards, Open Source & Commodity Hardware 
It is powerful to rely open source components, and using software and hardware that are not locked in to specific vendors by setting standards.
Unlocking value of a digital identity happens on the basis of easy and widespread usage of the identity in daily contexts. This is enabled through ease of integration and interoperability of the identity and the identity system with relying applications. Support for popular standards play a critical role in increasing the usage and interoperability at local and global levels.
The usage and support for plug and play commodity infrastructure at the backend and the front end for both the identity issuance and consumption fronts makes adoption easier. Usage of technologies such as mobile phones, cameras and plug and play biometric devices allows for both availability and choice.
MOSIP, a philanthropically funded (Gates Foundation, Norad et al) open source project offers a standards based modular platform with over a million lines of code that incorporates underlying principles of identity for development, security and privacy of user data, and a high assurance digital identity that is inclusive and accessible. 
Countries can of course continue to build using proprietary software and solutions, but should craft standards and SOPs to ensure vendor neutrality and data portability as well as privacy and security. 
